Kafka Connect is a powerful tool in the Apache Kafka ecosystem designed specifically for integrating Kafka with external systems — like databases, data lakes, cloud storage, Elasticsearch, etc.

Kafka Connect is a scalable, fault-tolerant framework for streaming data into and out of Kafka using reusable connectors — no custom code required.

It handles data ingestion and export to/from Kafka in a declarative, pluggable, and production-ready way.

1. Source Connector

Reads data from external systems into Kafka.

Examples:

JDBC Source Connector  → From MySQL/Postgres to Kafka

Debezium CDC Connector → From database binlogs

S3 Source Connector    → Ingest files from S3 into Kafka

2. Sink Connector

Reads data from Kafka and writes it to external systems.

Examples:

S3 Sink Connector  → Kafka → S3

Elasticsearch Sink → Kafka → Elastic

Delta Lake Sink (via custom or community connector)

Why Use Kafka Connect?

Feature	                        Benefit
No code needed	                Config-driven with JSON or REST API
Fault-tolerant & scalable	    Handles retries, parallelism, etc.
Works with schema registry	    For Avro, JSON Schema, Protobuf
Reusable connectors	            Plug-and-play integrations
Compatible with Kafka topics	Standard Kafka producers/consumers

{
  "name": "mysql-source",
  "config": {
    "connector.class": "io.confluent.connect.jdbc.JdbcSourceConnector",
    "connection.url": "jdbc:mysql://mysql:3306/inventory",
    "connection.user": "user",
    "connection.password": "pass",
    "table.whitelist": "products",
    "mode": "incrementing",
    "incrementing.column.name": "id",
    "topic.prefix": "mysql-"
  }
}

How Kafka Connect is Typically Deployed

As a standalone process (for dev/test/small-scale)

As a distributed cluster (in production) with:

Load balancing

Fault tolerance

Offset tracking

You deploy Kafka Connect like any other Java service (docker, k8s, systemd, etc.).

Best Practices

Use Schema Registry for schema evolution

Monitor with Kafka Connect REST API

Scale by running distributed mode with multiple workers

Use dead letter queues (DLQ) to handle bad records gracefully

Secure connectors with ACLs and SSL where needed
